Add Transactions & Batches docs page (#911)
garden-co/jazz: docs/content/docs/writing/transactions-and-batches.mdx

---
title: Transactions & Batches
description: "Grouping writes so they settle together: differences between transactions and batches, callback vs explicit forms, committing and durability."
reviewedAt: "17f6af400"
---

import { Accordion, Accordions } from "fumadocs-ui/components/accordion";

A single `insert`, `update`, or `delete` settles on its own. Group writes when several
changes should become visible together and share one accept-or-reject fate. Batches and

> transactions both do this; they differ in _when_ the group becomes visible.

Reviewer: Personal nit:
```suggestion
transactions both do this; they differ in _when_ the changes become visible.
```

## When to use which

| Use             | When                                                                                                     |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Single write    | The change stands alone. Returns an awaitable write handle.                                              |
| **Batch**       | Immediately readable locally after committing. If rejected at a higher tier, the whole batch rolls back. |

> | **Transaction** | Readable only once accepted at a higher tier.                                                            |

Reviewer: ⚠️ I think we should talk more clearly about how approval actually works and be more explicit about what the "authority" is

<include cwd lang="ts">
  ../examples/docs/todo-client-localfirst-ts/src/docs-snippets.ts#writing-tx-test-fixture-ts
</include>

</Accordion>
</Accordions>

## Read isolation

While a transaction or batch is open, its writes are _staged_, not yet committed. This
produces a deliberate split in what different reads observe:

- **Reads outside the transaction**&hairsp;—&hairsp;`db.all(...)`, `db.one(...)`&hairsp;—&hairsp;never observe
  staged writes. They return only committed data until the transaction or batch commits.
- **Batch-scoped reads**&hairsp;—&hairsp;`tx.all(...)`, `tx.one(...)` (and the same on a batch)&hairsp;—&hairsp;run
  against all current committed data layered with the transaction's _own_ staged writes.

The handle for batch-scoped reads is available either as an argument passed to the callback, or returned from the `beginBatch()` or `beginTransaction()` call.

<include cwd lang="ts">
  ../examples/docs/todo-client-localfirst-ts/src/docs-snippets.ts#writing-tx-isolation-ts
</include>

Concurrent group writes never observe each other's staged writes, even when they touch the same row.

> 

Reviewer: Did you intentionally avoid talking about the visibility of committed writes until we settle on the isolation model we want? I.e. right now txs can see concurrent committed writes, but in the future we'd like to have isolated transactions that see a "fixed" DB state captured at tx start time

Author: It's the same terminology question as https://github.com/garden-co/jazz/pull/911#discussion_r3281464343. I do have:

> Batch-scoped reads — tx.all(...), tx.one(...) (and the same on a batch) — run against **all current committed data** layered with the transaction's own staged writes.

in the previous section (added emphasis). This covers the 'today' state, but it's sloppy with 'batch' and 'transaction'.
